CUSTOMIZATION_RESTORATION.md, before:

# Fish Shell Customization Restoration Summary

## What Was Found

After reviewing your backup (`~/.config/fish.backup.20251124_023722`), it only contained:
- Minimal `config.fish` (just PATH additions)
- Basic `fish_variables` (default color settings, no theme)

**Missing from backup:**
- ❌ Custom greeting function (rotating "Hello!", "Namaste!", "Howdy!", etc.)
- ❌ ayu-mirage theme configuration
- ❌ Other personalizations

These were likely lost during your iCloud → OneDrive migration.

## What Has Been Restored

### ✅ Rotating Greeting Function
Created: `configs/.config/fish/functions/fish_greeting.fish`

Includes greetings:
- "Hello!"
- "Namaste!"
- "Howdy!"
- "Hey there!"
- "Welcome back!"

The function randomly selects one each time you open a new fish shell session.

### ✅ Theme Documentation
Added instructions in `configs/.config/fish/config.fish` and created `RESTORE_CUSTOMIZATIONS.md` with steps to restore the ayu-mirage theme.

## Next Steps

### 1. Reload Fish Shell
```bash
exec fish
```

You should now see the rotating greeting!

### 2. Restore ayu-mirage Theme

**Option A: Using fish_config GUI (Easiest)**
```bash
fish_config theme choose "ayu Mirage"
```

**Option B: Using fisher plugin manager**
```bash
fisher install ayu-theme/fish-ayu
set -U fish_theme ayu-mirage
```

**Option C: Manual installation**
See `configs/.config/fish/RESTORE_CUSTOMIZATIONS.md` for detailed steps.

### 3. Customize Greeting (Optional)

Edit the greeting function to add/remove greetings:
```bash
nano ~/.config/fish/functions/fish_greeting.fish
```

Since it's symlinked, changes will be tracked in the repository.

### 4. Verify Everything

```bash
./scripts/verify_all_configs.sh
```

Should show:
- ✅ Custom greeting function found
- ✅ All Control D functions (7/7)
- ✅ NM_ROOT environment variable

## Important Notes

1. **All customizations are now in the repository**: Since `~/.config/fish/` is symlinked to `configs/.config/fish/`, any changes you make will be tracked in git.

2. **Theme storage**: Fish themes are typically stored as:
   - Universal variables (`fish_theme`)
   - Theme files in `~/.config/fish/themes/` (if using fisher)
   - These are NOT in the backup, so you'll need to reinstall the theme

3. **Backup location**: Your original config is backed up at:
   `~/.config/fish.backup.20251124_023722/`

## Testing Control D Functions

After reloading fish shell, test the network functions:
```bash
nm-status    # ✅ Should work (you confirmed this)
nm-browse    # Test browsing mode
nm-privacy   # Test privacy mode
nm-gaming    # Test gaming mode
```

All functions are ready to use!

Commit message:

Refactor Fish configuration and update plugin management
- Enhanced .gitignore to exclude Cursor's ephemeral state and local configurations.
- Updated Fish config to streamline PATH management and improve plugin handling.
- Added a script for bootstrapping Fisher plugins, ensuring a consistent plugin environment.
- Removed outdated IDE state files and improved documentation for restoring customizations.
- Cleaned up unused functions and configurations to optimize performance.

CUSTOMIZATION_RESTORATION.md, after:

# Fish Shell Customization Restoration Summary

## What Was Found

After reviewing your backup (`~/.config/fish.backup.20251124_023722`), it only contained:

- Minimal `config.fish` (just PATH additions)
- Basic `fish_variables` (default color settings, no theme)

**Missing from backup:**

- ❌ Custom greeting function (rotating "Hello!", "Namaste!", "Howdy!", etc.)
- ❌ Prompt/theme customizations that lived outside the backup
- ❌ Other personalizations

These were likely lost during your iCloud → OneDrive migration.

## What Has Been Restored

### ✅ Rotating Greeting Function

Created: `configs/.config/fish/functions/fish_greeting.fish`

Includes greetings:

- "Hello!"
- "Namaste!"
- "Howdy!"
- "Hey there!"
- "Welcome back!"

The function randomly selects one each time you open a new fish shell session.

### ✅ Hydro Prompt (via Fisher) + Prompt Conflict Fix

- Added `jorgebucaran/hydro` to `configs/.config/fish/fish_plugins` so Fisher can install it.
- Moved any legacy prompt overrides out of the way (kept as backups) so Hydro can own `fish_prompt`/`fish_right_prompt`.

### ✅ Cohesive Dark Theme (Dracula)

- Fish colors are set in `configs/.config/fish/config.fish` using the Dracula palette (we intentionally do **not** track `fish_variables` to avoid noisy diffs).
- `config.fish` now sets Dracula-style defaults for `fzf` and `bat` (only if you haven’t already customized them).

## Next Steps

### 1. Reload Fish Shell

```bash
exec fish
```

You should now see the rotating greeting!

### 2. Install/Update Fisher Plugins (Hydro)

```bash
fisher update
```

Repo shortcut (recommended):

```bash
./scripts/bootstrap_fish_plugins.sh
```

If you want to install Hydro explicitly:

```bash
fisher install jorgebucaran/hydro
```

### 3. Customize Greeting (Optional)

Edit the greeting function to add/remove greetings:

```bash
nano ~/.config/fish/functions/fish_greeting.fish
```

Since it's symlinked, changes will be tracked in the repository.

### 4. Verify Everything

```bash
./scripts/verify_all_configs.sh
```

Should show:

- ✅ Custom greeting function found
- ✅ All Control D functions (7/7)
- ✅ NM_ROOT environment variable

## Important Notes

1. **All customizations are now in the repository**: Since `~/.config/fish/` is symlinked to `configs/.config/fish/`, any changes you make will be tracked in git.

2. **Theme storage**: In this setup, Fish colors are set in `config.fish` (repo-managed). Tool theming (fzf/bat)
   is set as a default in `config.fish` without overwriting custom values.

3. **Backup location**: Your original config is backed up at:
   `~/.config/fish.backup.20251124_023722/`

## Testing Control D Functions

After reloading fish shell, test the network functions:

```bash
nm-status    # ✅ Should work (you confirmed this)
nm-browse    # Test browsing mode
nm-privacy   # Test privacy mode
nm-gaming    # Test gaming mode
```

All functions are ready to use!
