controld-system/FINAL_SUMMARY.md, before:

# Control D: Final Configuration Summary

**Date**: November 18, 2025  
**Configuration Status**: Production-Ready ✓

---

## What You Have Now

### Core Service
- ✅ Auto-start on boot via Launch Daemon
- ✅ `--skip_self_checks` flag (fail-operational mode)
- ✅ Firewall exception configured
- ✅ Three DNS profiles ready (privacy, browsing, gaming)

### Monitoring & Health
- ✅ **Enhanced health check** with network transition detection
- ✅ **Baseline test suite** for post-change verification
- ✅ **Integrated monitoring** in weekly maintenance system
- ✅ Auto-restart on service failure
- ✅ Auto-recovery from DNS cache issues

### Documentation
- ✅ **README.md** - Comprehensive guide with break-glass procedures
- ✅ **QUICKREF.md** - Daily command reference
- ✅ **VPN_INTEGRATION.md** - Windscribe + Control D guide
- ✅ **UPGRADES.md** - Upgrade procedures and baseline tests
- ✅ **SETUP_SUMMARY.md** - Data flow diagrams and setup details

---

## Network Transition Edge Cases - SOLVED ✓

Your question about "stuck" DNS states was prescient. The enhanced monitor now detects and auto-recovers from:

### 1. Split-Horizon DNS
**Problem**: Multiple DNS resolvers active after network transitions  
**Detection**: Counts unique nameservers in system config  
**Recovery**: Auto-flushes DNS cache if detected

### 2. mDNSResponder Cache Poisoning
**Problem**: Stale DNS entries persist after network change  
**Detection**: Tests with timestamp-based unique query  
**Recovery**: Flushes mDNSResponder cache automatically

### 3. Control D Not Primary Resolver
**Problem**: System falls back to DHCP DNS after sleep/wake  
**Detection**: Checks if 127.0.0.1 is in resolver list  
**Recovery**: Flags for attention (may need service restart)

### 4. VPN Reconnection Race
**Problem**: VPN reconnects before Control D ready  
**Detection**: DNS resolution test + upstream connectivity check  
**Recovery**: Service auto-restart if needed

**Result**: The monitor script now runs 9 checks (up from 3), catching edge cases you might encounter during:
- Sleep/wake cycles
- WiFi network switches  
- VPN connect/disconnect
- macOS network preference changes

---

## Data Flow Visualized

### Without VPN
```
App → macOS Resolver → Control D (127.0.0.1:53) 
  → DoH (encrypted) → Control D Servers → Internet
```

**Privacy**: DNS encrypted, IPs visible to ISP

### With VPN + Local DNS (Recommended)
```
App → macOS Resolver → Control D (127.0.0.1:53) 
  → VPN Tunnel → DoH (encrypted) → Control D Servers → Internet
```

**Privacy**: DNS double-encrypted, IPs hidden from ISP  
**Security**: Maximum privacy configuration ✓

---

## Maintenance Integration - COMPLETE

### Weekly Maintenance
Your `run_all_maintenance.sh` now includes Control D as task #7:

```bash
# Automatically runs:
1. System Health Check
2. Homebrew Maintenance  
3. Quick System Cleanup
4. Deep System Cleaning
5. Remove Unwanted Files
6. General System Cleanup
7. Control D Service Monitor ← NEW
```

**Logs to**: `~/Public/Scripts/controld_monitor.log`

### Test Suites

**Quick Baseline** (6 tests, ~2 seconds):
```bash
~/.config/controld/baseline-test.sh
```
Run after: upgrades, config changes, macOS updates

**Full Health Check** (6-9 checks, ~5 seconds):
```bash
~/.config/controld/health-check.sh
```
Run for: troubleshooting, post-reboot verification

**Integrated Monitor** (9 checks + auto-recovery):
```bash
~/Public/Scripts/maintenance/controld_monitor.sh
```
Runs automatically via weekly maintenance

---

## Windscribe VPN Integration

### Recommended Setup
```bash
# One-time configuration
windscribe connect
windscribe dns local    # Use Control D for DNS

# Verify
curl -s https://ipleak.net/json/ | jq -r '.dns_servers[]'
# Should NOT show ISP DNS
```

### Startup Order (Automatic)
1. Control D auto-starts on boot
2. Wait 5-10 seconds
3. Connect Windscribe (manual or auto)
4. System uses Control D → VPN tunnel → Internet

### Common Issues (All Documented)
See `~/.config/controld/VPN_INTEGRATION.md` for:
- DNS not resolving after VPN connects
- DNS leak detection and fixes
- Split personality (inconsistent DNS)
- Emergency recovery procedures

---

## Upgrade Pattern

### When Upgrading ctrld
```bash
brew upgrade ctrld
sudo ctrld service status  # Usually still running
~/.config/controld/baseline-test.sh  # Quick verify
```

**No reconfiguration needed** - launch daemon persists with `--skip_self_checks`

### After macOS Updates
```bash
# Check service
sudo ctrld service status

# Check firewall (may be reset)
sudo /usr/libexec/ApplicationFirewall/socketfilterfw --listapps | grep ctrld

# Run baseline
~/.config/controld/baseline-test.sh

# If issues, see break-glass procedure in README.md
```

---

## File Locations

### Configuration
- **Main config**: `~/.config/controld/ctrld.toml`
- **Launch daemon**: `/Library/LaunchDaemons/ctrld.plist`
- **Logs**: `/var/log/ctrld.log`

### Tools
- **Health check**: `~/.config/controld/health-check.sh`
- **Baseline test**: `~/.config/controld/baseline-test.sh`
- **Monitor**: `~/Public/Scripts/maintenance/controld_monitor.sh`

### Documentation
All in `~/.config/controld/`:
- `README.md` - Main guide + break-glass procedures
- `QUICKREF.md` - Daily commands
- `VPN_INTEGRATION.md` - Windscribe guide
- `UPGRADES.md` - Upgrade procedures
- `SETUP_SUMMARY.md` - Technical details + diagrams

### Logs
- **Monitor log**: `~/Public/Scripts/controld_monitor.log`
- **Error log**: `~/Public/Scripts/controld_monitor_error.log`
- **Service log**: `/var/log/ctrld.log`

---

## Quick Command Reference

### Daily Operations
```bash
# Check status
sudo ctrld service status

# View logs
sudo tail -f /var/log/ctrld.log

# Quick health check
~/.config/controld/baseline-test.sh
```

### After Network Changes
```bash
# Flush DNS cache (if things feel slow)
sudo dscacheutil -flushcache
sudo killall -HUP mDNSResponder

# Run full health check
~/.config/controld/health-check.sh
```

### Troubleshooting
```bash
# Break-glass procedure (see README.md)
# 1. Check service
# 2. Check DNS resolution  
# 3. Check logs
# 4. Emergency DNS restore
# 5. Complete reset (nuclear option)
```

---

## Security Posture

### What's Protected
- ✅ DNS queries encrypted (DoH)
- ✅ Malware/tracker blocking active
- ✅ No DNS leaks (with proper VPN config)
- ✅ Local filtering (works offline)

### What `--skip_self_checks` Does NOT Compromise
- ❌ DNS encryption (still active)
- ❌ Filtering rules (still enforced)
- ❌ Upstream connectivity (tested at runtime)
- ❌ Attack prevention (DoH provides this)

### What It IS
- ✅ Configuration validation bypass
- ✅ Operational reliability enhancement
- ✅ Firewall timing workaround

**Verdict**: No meaningful security tradeoff ✓

---

## Next Actions for You

### Immediate (Next Reboot)
```bash
# After reboot, verify auto-start
~/.config/controld/health-check.sh
```

### Optional (Daily Check)
If you want daily automated monitoring, see `UPGRADES.md` for launchd agent setup.

### When Using Windscribe
```bash
# Configure once
windscribe dns local

# Test for DNS leaks
curl -s https://ipleak.net/json/ | jq -r '.dns_servers[]'
```

### After System/Software Updates
```bash
# Quick baseline
~/.config/controld/baseline-test.sh

# If fails, full diagnostics
~/.config/controld/health-check.sh
```

---

## Teaching Moments Reinforced

### 1. Fail-Operational Philosophy
We chose availability over startup validation because:
- Self-checks validate config, not security
- DoH encryption provides real security
- Service can self-heal from upstream issues
- No ongoing maintenance (no IP allow-lists to manage)

### 2. Defense in Depth
Multiple security layers:
- Layer 1: Control D filtering (malware/trackers)
- Layer 2: DoH encryption (DNS privacy)
- Layer 3: VPN tunnel (IP privacy)
- Layer 4: Firewall (network access control)

Self-checks are validation, not a security layer.

### 3. Network Transitions Are Hard
macOS DNS resolver state can persist incorrectly after:
- Sleep/wake with different network
- VPN connect/disconnect
- Network preference changes
- Manual DNS config edits

**Solution**: Proactive monitoring with auto-recovery

### 4. Operational Wisdom
"Future you will thank present you for":
- Creating multiple test tiers (baseline → health → monitor)
- Documenting edge cases before they bite you
- Building auto-recovery into monitoring
- Visualizing data flow for quick mental model

---

## Known Limitations

### What's NOT Covered
1. **Corporate VPNs**: May override DNS, see `VPN_INTEGRATION.md`
2. **Captive Portals**: May need to temporarily disable Control D
3. **Split DNS Scenarios**: Some apps may bypass system resolver
4. **DNS over port 53**: If blocked, need to use DoT/DoQ instead

### When to Seek Help
- Persistent DNS failures after running health check
- Service won't start after following break-glass procedure
- Upgrade changes config format
- New macOS version breaks launch daemon

**Resources**:
- Local docs: `~/.config/controld/`
- Control D Support: support@controld.com
- Community: Control D Discord/Reddit

---

## Final Checklist

Before considering this complete:

- [ ] Reboot and run `~/.config/controld/health-check.sh`
- [ ] Verify weekly maintenance includes Control D
- [ ] Test Windscribe VPN integration if you plan to use it
- [ ] Run baseline tests after next brew upgrade
- [ ] Bookmark `~/.config/controld/QUICKREF.md` for daily use

---

## What Makes This Production-Grade

1. **Self-Healing**: Auto-restarts, auto-recovers from cache issues
2. **Well-Monitored**: 9 health checks including edge cases
3. **Well-Documented**: 5 docs + 3 test scripts
4. **Well-Integrated**: Part of existing maintenance workflow
5. **Future-Proof**: Handles upgrades, profile changes, protocol changes
6. **Operationally Sound**: Fail-operational where appropriate
7. **Security-Conscious**: DoH + filtering + optional VPN

---

**You're all set!** 🎉

The setup will auto-start on boot, monitor itself weekly, auto-recover from common issues, and is documented for future maintenance.

Any configuration changes (profiles, protocols, endpoints) just require editing `ctrld.toml` and restarting the service. The `--skip_self_checks` flag remains appropriate for all configurations.

Enjoy your enhanced DNS privacy and security!

Commit message:

Align Control D docs and verification with DoH3 and network mode separation

controld-system/FINAL_SUMMARY.md, after:

# Control D: Final Configuration Summary

**Date**: November 18, 2025  
**Configuration Status**: Production-Ready ✓

> **Current Implementation Note (v4.1+):** This summary reflects the
> original DoH/TCP-only configuration built around
> `~/.config/controld`. Since v4.1, the live system runs via
> `/etc/controld` + `controld-manager` with DoH3 defaults and the
> separation strategy implemented in `scripts/network-mode-manager.sh`.
> Use this document for historical context and operational patterns; for
> current wiring, see `controld-system/README.md` and the v4.x
> Separation Strategy docs.

---

## What You Have Now

### Core Service
- ✅ Auto-start on boot via Launch Daemon
- ✅ `--skip_self_checks` flag (fail-operational mode)
- ✅ Firewall exception configured
- ✅ Three DNS profiles ready (privacy, browsing, gaming)

### Monitoring & Health
- ✅ **Enhanced health check** with network transition detection
- ✅ **Baseline test suite** for post-change verification
- ✅ **Integrated monitoring** in weekly maintenance system
- ✅ Auto-restart on service failure
- ✅ Auto-recovery from DNS cache issues

### Documentation
- ✅ **README.md** - Comprehensive guide with break-glass procedures
- ✅ **QUICKREF.md** - Daily command reference
- ✅ **VPN_INTEGRATION.md** - Windscribe + Control D guide
- ✅ **UPGRADES.md** - Upgrade procedures and baseline tests
- ✅ **SETUP_SUMMARY.md** - Data flow diagrams and setup details

---

## Network Transition Edge Cases - SOLVED ✓

Your question about "stuck" DNS states was prescient. The enhanced monitor now detects and auto-recovers from:

### 1. Split-Horizon DNS
**Problem**: Multiple DNS resolvers active after network transitions  
**Detection**: Counts unique nameservers in system config  
**Recovery**: Auto-flushes DNS cache if detected

### 2. mDNSResponder Cache Poisoning
**Problem**: Stale DNS entries persist after network change  
**Detection**: Tests with timestamp-based unique query  
**Recovery**: Flushes mDNSResponder cache automatically

### 3. Control D Not Primary Resolver
**Problem**: System falls back to DHCP DNS after sleep/wake  
**Detection**: Checks if 127.0.0.1 is in resolver list  
**Recovery**: Flags for attention (may need service restart)

### 4. VPN Reconnection Race
**Problem**: VPN reconnects before Control D ready  
**Detection**: DNS resolution test + upstream connectivity check  
**Recovery**: Service auto-restart if needed

**Result**: The monitor script now runs 9 checks (up from 3), catching edge cases you might encounter during:
- Sleep/wake cycles
- WiFi network switches  
- VPN connect/disconnect
- macOS network preference changes

---

## Data Flow Visualized

### Without VPN
```
App → macOS Resolver → Control D (127.0.0.1:53) 
  → DoH (encrypted) → Control D Servers → Internet
```

**Privacy**: DNS encrypted, IPs visible to ISP

### With VPN + Local DNS (Recommended)
```
App → macOS Resolver → Control D (127.0.0.1:53) 
  → VPN Tunnel → DoH (encrypted) → Control D Servers → Internet
```

**Privacy**: DNS double-encrypted, IPs hidden from ISP  
**Security**: Maximum privacy configuration ✓

---

## Maintenance Integration - COMPLETE

### Weekly Maintenance
Your `run_all_maintenance.sh` now includes Control D as task #7:

```bash
# Automatically runs:
1. System Health Check
2. Homebrew Maintenance  
3. Quick System Cleanup
4. Deep System Cleaning
5. Remove Unwanted Files
6. General System Cleanup
7. Control D Service Monitor ← NEW
```

**Logs to**: `~/Public/Scripts/controld_monitor.log`

### Test Suites

**Quick Baseline** (6 tests, ~2 seconds):
```bash
~/.config/controld/baseline-test.sh
```
Run after: upgrades, config changes, macOS updates

**Full Health Check** (6-9 checks, ~5 seconds):
```bash
~/.config/controld/health-check.sh
```
Run for: troubleshooting, post-reboot verification

**Integrated Monitor** (9 checks + auto-recovery):
```bash
~/Public/Scripts/maintenance/controld_monitor.sh
```
Runs automatically via weekly maintenance

---

## Windscribe VPN Integration

### Recommended Setup
```bash
# One-time configuration
windscribe connect
windscribe dns local    # Use Control D for DNS

# Verify
curl -s https://ipleak.net/json/ | jq -r '.dns_servers[]'
# Should NOT show ISP DNS
```

### Startup Order (Automatic)
1. Control D auto-starts on boot
2. Wait 5-10 seconds
3. Connect Windscribe (manual or auto)
4. System uses Control D → VPN tunnel → Internet

### Common Issues (All Documented)
See `~/.config/controld/VPN_INTEGRATION.md` for:
- DNS not resolving after VPN connects
- DNS leak detection and fixes
- Split personality (inconsistent DNS)
- Emergency recovery procedures

---

## Upgrade Pattern

### When Upgrading ctrld
```bash
brew upgrade ctrld
sudo ctrld service status  # Usually still running
~/.config/controld/baseline-test.sh  # Quick verify
```

**No reconfiguration needed** - launch daemon persists with `--skip_self_checks`

### After macOS Updates
```bash
# Check service
sudo ctrld service status

# Check firewall (may be reset)
sudo /usr/libexec/ApplicationFirewall/socketfilterfw --listapps | grep ctrld

# Run baseline
~/.config/controld/baseline-test.sh

# If issues, see break-glass procedure in README.md
```

---

## File Locations

### Configuration
- **Main config**: `~/.config/controld/ctrld.toml`
- **Launch daemon**: `/Library/LaunchDaemons/ctrld.plist`
- **Logs**: `/var/log/ctrld.log`

### Tools
- **Health check**: `~/.config/controld/health-check.sh`
- **Baseline test**: `~/.config/controld/baseline-test.sh`
- **Monitor**: `~/Public/Scripts/maintenance/controld_monitor.sh`

### Documentation
All in `~/.config/controld/`:
- `README.md` - Main guide + break-glass procedures
- `QUICKREF.md` - Daily commands
- `VPN_INTEGRATION.md` - Windscribe guide
- `UPGRADES.md` - Upgrade procedures
- `SETUP_SUMMARY.md` - Technical details + diagrams

### Logs
- **Monitor log**: `~/Public/Scripts/controld_monitor.log`
- **Error log**: `~/Public/Scripts/controld_monitor_error.log`
- **Service log**: `/var/log/ctrld.log`

---

## Quick Command Reference

### Daily Operations
```bash
# Check status
sudo ctrld service status

# View logs
sudo tail -f /var/log/ctrld.log

# Quick health check
~/.config/controld/baseline-test.sh
```

### After Network Changes
```bash
# Flush DNS cache (if things feel slow)
sudo dscacheutil -flushcache
sudo killall -HUP mDNSResponder

# Run full health check
~/.config/controld/health-check.sh
```

### Troubleshooting
```bash
# Break-glass procedure (see README.md)
# 1. Check service
# 2. Check DNS resolution  
# 3. Check logs
# 4. Emergency DNS restore
# 5. Complete reset (nuclear option)
```

---

## Security Posture

### What's Protected
- ✅ DNS queries encrypted (DoH)
- ✅ Malware/tracker blocking active
- ✅ No DNS leaks (with proper VPN config)
- ✅ Local filtering (works offline)

### What `--skip_self_checks` Does NOT Compromise
- ❌ DNS encryption (still active)
- ❌ Filtering rules (still enforced)
- ❌ Upstream connectivity (tested at runtime)
- ❌ Attack prevention (DoH provides this)

### What It IS
- ✅ Configuration validation bypass
- ✅ Operational reliability enhancement
- ✅ Firewall timing workaround

**Verdict**: No meaningful security tradeoff ✓

---

## Next Actions for You

### Immediate (Next Reboot)
```bash
# After reboot, verify auto-start
~/.config/controld/health-check.sh
```

### Optional (Daily Check)
If you want daily automated monitoring, see `UPGRADES.md` for launchd agent setup.

### When Using Windscribe
```bash
# Configure once
windscribe dns local

# Test for DNS leaks
curl -s https://ipleak.net/json/ | jq -r '.dns_servers[]'
```

### After System/Software Updates
```bash
# Quick baseline
~/.config/controld/baseline-test.sh

# If fails, full diagnostics
~/.config/controld/health-check.sh
```

---

## Teaching Moments Reinforced

### 1. Fail-Operational Philosophy
We chose availability over startup validation because:
- Self-checks validate config, not security
- DoH encryption provides real security
- Service can self-heal from upstream issues
- No ongoing maintenance (no IP allow-lists to manage)

### 2. Defense in Depth
Multiple security layers:
- Layer 1: Control D filtering (malware/trackers)
- Layer 2: DoH encryption (DNS privacy)
- Layer 3: VPN tunnel (IP privacy)
- Layer 4: Firewall (network access control)

Self-checks are validation, not a security layer.

### 3. Network Transitions Are Hard
macOS DNS resolver state can persist incorrectly after:
- Sleep/wake with different network
- VPN connect/disconnect
- Network preference changes
- Manual DNS config edits

**Solution**: Proactive monitoring with auto-recovery

### 4. Operational Wisdom
"Future you will thank present you for":
- Creating multiple test tiers (baseline → health → monitor)
- Documenting edge cases before they bite you
- Building auto-recovery into monitoring
- Visualizing data flow for quick mental model

---

## Known Limitations

### What's NOT Covered
1. **Corporate VPNs**: May override DNS, see `VPN_INTEGRATION.md`
2. **Captive Portals**: May need to temporarily disable Control D
3. **Split DNS Scenarios**: Some apps may bypass system resolver
4. **DNS over port 53**: If blocked, need to use DoT/DoQ instead

### When to Seek Help
- Persistent DNS failures after running health check
- Service won't start after following break-glass procedure
- Upgrade changes config format
- New macOS version breaks launch daemon

**Resources**:
- Local docs: `~/.config/controld/`
- Control D Support: support@controld.com
- Community: Control D Discord/Reddit

---

## Final Checklist

Before considering this complete:

- [ ] Reboot and run `~/.config/controld/health-check.sh`
- [ ] Verify weekly maintenance includes Control D
- [ ] Test Windscribe VPN integration if you plan to use it
- [ ] Run baseline tests after next brew upgrade
- [ ] Bookmark `~/.config/controld/QUICKREF.md` for daily use

---

## What Makes This Production-Grade

1. **Self-Healing**: Auto-restarts, auto-recovers from cache issues
2. **Well-Monitored**: 9 health checks including edge cases
3. **Well-Documented**: 5 docs + 3 test scripts
4. **Well-Integrated**: Part of existing maintenance workflow
5. **Future-Proof**: Handles upgrades, profile changes, protocol changes
6. **Operationally Sound**: Fail-operational where appropriate
7. **Security-Conscious**: DoH + filtering + optional VPN

---

**You're all set!** 🎉

The setup will auto-start on boot, monitor itself weekly, auto-recover from common issues, and is documented for future maintenance.

Any configuration changes (profiles, protocols, endpoints) just require editing `ctrld.toml` and restarting the service. The `--skip_self_checks` flag remains appropriate for all configurations.

Enjoy your enhanced DNS privacy and security!
